---
layout: post
title: 'Digital Protest, Hacking'
date: 2018-11-29 14:00:00
teacher: ''
unit: ''
abstract: ''
venue: RCA
website: ''
thumb: ''
---

## An outline of hacking culture

Hacking started as a non-technological thing. The term is coined at the [Tech Model Railroad Club]() at MIT (in the 1940s). They had this huge train track and started using early computers to control signals etc. They ended up using a TX-0 valve computer (which was 3,000,000 at the time). The come up with the idea that _information wants to be free_.

Like any subculture, these people start to make up their own words: _Foobar_, _mung_, _hack_ (which is an elaborate prank at MIT). See also the [Jargon File 4.4.7]()

Language emerged from programming: `if (going)` and `if (!going)`. Why are programmers into fantasy literature? Because coding is a bit like magic (maybe).

Also [The Homebrew Computer Club]() (where Woz and Jobs would hang out) and [2600 Hacker Quarterly](). 2600Hz is the frequency that AT&T would use to indicate that there was money in the phone (ie. if you could whistle into the phone correctly you could make calls for free).

## Hacking as protest

[List of security hacking incidents]()

|1903|Magician hacks into a telegraph machine demonstration|
|1943|Rene Carmille hacks the Nazis' punchcard system|
|1943|Turing|

Von Neuman knew about self-replicating machines (ie. viruses) in the 1940s of course. See also [Conway's Game of Life](). Also the [recursive version]().

The CCC happens every year. (They invented Blinkenlights). [Hilbilly Tracking of low earth orbit]().
Also [USB Flashdrives for Freedom]

Aaron Swartz

Julian Oliver: _Transparency Grenade_ - throw it into a building and it starts logging network traffic. Here he's using a physical object to give shape to this abstract protest idea.

Also windo turbines powering a computer mining bitcoin funding climate research. A non-human object that works by itself. Hyvrid-protests.
