---
layout: post
title:  "Don't Design for New Users"
date:   2014-12-23 12:51:32
categories: ""
banner: newusers.svg
---

I was certain there was something deeply wrong about this, but I couldn't put a point to it. So I'm writing this to find out why I think that you shouldn't design for new users.

Whenever user interface work is discussed, someone in the room will say something like "It's going to make things easier for new users!". What they probably think is: "Let's make this pretty so new users like it but I don't really care because I've been using this tool forever and I know where stuff is."

This comes from a misconception of what design should be trying to do. Making something pretty is not a design goal. Neither is making something simple. Helping people accomplish whatever they're trying to get done is. If you base you descisions on that premise, the distinction between old and new users becomes obsolete. Wether someone has been using you product for five minutes or ten years, they're probably all trying to do the same task.

Think of London Underground. It's used by half a billion people each year. Some of those probably use it multiple times a day, and have been for years. For others, the tube might be the first underground they've used in their lives. But the minute someone goes down the escalator, they share the same goal with everyone else: Getting from point A to point B.

<figure>
	<a href= {{site.url}} "/assets/screenshot.jpg">Original Tube Map (1912)</a>
</figure>

To accomplish that, they all need the same information. Which line do I need to take,

Displaying information in a simple, easy-to-understand manner doesn't mean leaving out parts of it.
I doesn't matter how much or how little information you're exposing, if it's difficult to access it becomes worthless.

If you let this mentality creep into your design process, you'll end up in the same situation as Wikipedia. Every single change they make to their interface comes with a checkbox that disables it for "advanced users". They

If you wanna learn about design, don't look at Paul Rand logos. Go to an airport.